
<pre>
<verbatim>

From: Norman Dunbar <Norman.Dunbar@lfs.co.uk>
Subject: Archive logs? help?
Newsgroups: comp.databases.oracle.server
Date: Fri Mar 07 16:06:27 2003 +0100

...

when doing a hot backup you start (well, I do) by 'alter system archive
log current' to get a fresh flush of the current logfile, which forces a
new one to be used. You'll need to know the name, rank & serial number
of this new one as it needs to stay with the hot backup files.

Than slap each tablespace into backup mode ONE AT A TIME, copy it, take
it out of backup mode. Repeat until finished. DON'T put all tablespaces
into backup mode, copy them all etc - it just causes masses of archive
logs to be generated ! (Read Only tablespaces should be dumped at the
point they became read only, then they never need dumping again - unless
you make them read-write again !)

Do another' archive log current' at the end of the hot backup.

Once you have taken the dump, all the hot backup files and all the
archived logs from the start of the backup should be kept. The first one
of course is the one you forced to be used with the initial 'archive log
current' command. From this point onwards, until the next backup, you
will need the datafile copies and the archived logs, all of them. 

When a restore is required, simply restore the datafile(s) that are
actually broken, and either recover database or recover tablespace or
even recover datafile 'blah' at which point, Oracle will tell you which
log file it needs to begin the recovery.

(God help me if I've made any errors in the above - I'll get a severe
and well deserved telling off from Howard !)

Basically, to do a recovery from hot backup dump files taken at time X,
you need all the archived log files since the START of that hot backup
to be available.

If you have a 'spare' database lying around, take a hot backup, add some
data to a tables or three, shut it down and delete a/the/some datafiles
using the OS commands applicable, then do a recovery from your hot
backup. Practice makes perfect (sometimes) and it is best to have tried
it out on a totally unimportant database before you have to do it for
real. Trust me, I know - junior dba, first day on job, senior dba left
on the Friday previous with instructions for me to 'delete file xxx from
the source database as the tablespace has been dropped' so I did. You
can imagine the panic that then ensued as I work in a software house and
that database is where the source code lives !!!  I did, get a recovery
with no loss of data in the end, but it took me a long time (until 02:00
AM - I'd never heard of this NewsGroup then - wish I had !!)

Cheers,
Norman.

</verbatim>
</pre>

** Estimates

  - Some people suggest to use *RMAN* this would be easier.

